Alternative Schema and Custom Security Schemes (#1736)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: versions/3.1.0.md

<a name="alternativeSchemaLocation"></a>location | `url` | **REQUIRED**.  This is a absolute or relative reference to an external resource containing a schema of a known type.  This reference may contain a fragment identifier to reference only a subset of an external document.

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

##### Examples

Minimalist usage of alternative schema:

```yaml
schema:
  alternativeSchema:
    type: jsonSchema
    location: ./real-jsonschema.json
```

Combination of OAS schema and alternative:

```yaml
schema:
  type: object
  nullable: true
  alternativeSchema:
    type: jsonSchema
    location: ./real-jsonschema.json
```

Multiple different versions of alternative schema:

```yaml
schema:
  anyOf:
  - alternativeSchema:
      type: jsonSchema
      location: ./real-jsonschema-08.json
  - alternativeSchema:
      type: jsonSchema
      location: ./real-jsonschema-07.json
```

Combined alternative schemas:

```yaml
schema:
  allOf:
  - alternativeSchema:
      type: xmlSchema

>       location: ./xmlSchema.xsd

Reviewer: I'd add a `fragment` to better clarify https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/1736/files#diff-b83206d953b4be5d312b068f82ba0217R3174

eg. see https://github.com/teamdigitale/api-openapi-samples/blob/alternativeSchema/openapi-v3/external-schema.yaml

```
            anyOf:
            - alternativeSchema:
                type: xmlSchema
                location: schema.xsd#/person
```
@andreapoli

  - alternativeSchema:
      type: schematron
      location: ./schema.sch
```

Mixed OAS schema and alternative schema:

```yaml
schema:
  type: array
  items:
    alternativeSchema:
        type: jsonSchema
        location: ./real-jsonschema.json
```

##### Alternative Schema Registry

It is important that there is a common understanding of the values which can be used to populate the alterative schema "type" property. An registry of alternative schema types is hosted at [https://spec.openapis.org/registries/alternative-schema](https://spec.openapis.org/registries/alternative-schema). This register serves as a controlled vocabulary which should be used to populate the "type" property.  The Inital contents of the registry include:

Name | Link | Description
---|:---:|---

> <a name="jsonSchemaType"></a>jsonSchema | `https://spec.openapis.org/registries/alternative-schema#jsonSchema` | JSON schema documents

Reviewer: If next OAS will use jsonSchema this could be removed, right?

---|:---:|---
<a name="alternativeSchemaType"></a>type | `string` | **REQUIRED**. The value MUST match one of the values identified in the alternative Schema Registry.
<a name="alternativeSchemaLocation"></a>location | `url` | **REQUIRED**.  This is a absolute or relative reference to an external resource containing a schema of a known type.  This reference may contain a fragment identifier to reference only a subset of an external document.

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

##### Examples

Minimalist usage of alternative schema:

```yaml
schema:
  alternativeSchema:
    type: jsonSchema
    location: ./real-jsonschema.json
```

Combination of OAS schema and alternative:

```yaml
schema:
  type: object
  nullable: true
  alternativeSchema:
    type: jsonSchema
    location: ./real-jsonschema.json
```

Multiple different versions of alternative schema:

```yaml
schema:
  anyOf:
  - alternativeSchema:
      type: jsonSchema
      location: ./real-jsonschema-08.json
  - alternativeSchema:
      type: jsonSchema
      location: ./real-jsonschema-07.json
```

Combined alternative schemas:

```yaml
schema:

>   allOf:

Reviewer 2: Do we need a `allOf` that has `firstOf` semantics?  Should this be a blocker for shipping `alternative-schema`?

Reviewer 3: `x-oas-draft-firstOfPleaseDontBugJSONSchemaAboutThis` 😜

Reviewer 3: As noted on today's call (for the benefit of those not present), I think (pending the resolution of other procedural concerns), we should move ahead with `alternativeSchema` for the many use cases that do not require `firstOf` semantics, and consider `x-oas-draft-firstOf` to get more feedback on that use case.  Particularly how prevalent it is in practice.

  - alternativeSchema:
      type: xmlSchema
      location: ./xmlSchema.xsd
  - alternativeSchema:
      type: schematron
      location: ./schema.sch
```

Mixed OAS schema and alternative schema:

```yaml
schema:
  type: array
  items:
    alternativeSchema:
        type: jsonSchema
        location: ./real-jsonschema.json
```

##### Alternative Schema Registry

> It is important that there is a common understanding of the values which can be used to populate the alterative schema "type" property. An registry of alternative schema types is hosted at [https://spec.openapis.org/registries/alternative-schema](https://spec.openapis.org/registries/alternative-schema). This register serves as a controlled vocabulary which should be used to populate the "type" property.  The Inital contents of the registry include:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is important that there is a common understanding of the values which can be used to populate the alternative schema "type" property. A registry of alternative schema types is hosted at [https://spec.openapis.org/registries/alternative-schema](https://spec.openapis.org/registries/alternative-schema). This register serves as a controlled vocabulary which should be used to populate the "type" property.  The Initial contents of the registry include:
```

Reviewer 3: Also "This register serves" -> "This registry serves"

Reviewer 5: Note: link is dead for me

Reviewer 3: @fenollp yeah, I think the expectation is that that registry will exist by the time OAS 3.1 is published, but it has not been set up yet.
